---
title: "This is A Test"
authors: ["Wesley Smith", "Becca Marr"]
school: "Walt Whitman High School"
category: "study"
tags: ["freud", "test"]
---

# Abstract
THIS IS A TEST STUDY. This research explored the correlation between social groups and political identities. The researchers examined prior
social psychology studies, as well as the correlation between an individual and their social group’s beliefs,
specifically regarding politics. The recent studies conducted in the aftermath of the 2016 election looked at the
extremely polarized political climate that exists today, which served as the main inspiration for this research.
This study was comprised of a survey that contained two sections of questions addressing partisan beliefs. The questions
in each section were the same, but the first section was directed at the individual’s beliefs, while the second was
directed at what the individual felt the majority of their social group would believe. From participants’ responses to
these questions, the researchers calculated a political affiliation score for each individual and their social group.
The research revealed a weak correlation between the political affiliation of the individual and that of their social
group. This research could be used in the future to explore potential paths toward compatibility among people with
different political beliefs, and it could also highlight areas that could be improved within our political realm.

# Introduction/Literature Review
The area of focus in this research is to determine how a person’s political affiliation correlates to their social
group’s overall political affiliation. This research is important to determine how great of a role friends’ opinions may
play in an individual’s political policies. Because politics have become a major area of contention recently,
particularly among the American population, the results of this study could be used to highlight the implications of
such stark disagreements.
This literature review will address three themes that past research of this topic has explored: politics, friends, and
social psychology. These subjects are interrelated when discussing interactions within social groups, specifically
regarding political opinions. Two Pew Research surveys and a study conducted by Camila Campos, Shaun Heap, and Fernanda
Lopez de Leon have looked at the variety of political opinions in social groups (2016; 2017). Others such as Christopher
Kenny and Paul Beck have focused on the influence of the political affiliations of friends (1994; 2002). Based on
results of these surveys as well as the application of social psychology in a social group setting, it is hypothesized
that an individual’s political affiliation will positively correlate with their social group’s overall political
affiliation.
The first common thread identified was social psychology, which was exemplified through a famous study conducted by
Solomon Asch. The information presented in the study zeroes in on the concept of conformity, a person’s tendency to
mirror the actions of others in a group, and how it relates to groupthink. Groupthink occurs when a group of people
begin to think in the same way in an attempt to maintain harmony within the group (Schmidt, 2016). The spread of
groupthink, for which this research is predicated on, occurs during the social interactions within social groups. This
concept can be expanded upon especially with the idea of political affiliations and how a social group can influence
those identities in the realm of politics. Asch’s experiment displayed an individual’s tendency to conform to a group
belief, even if it was clear that the group’s belief was wrong. In his study, Asch placed one participant in a group of
actors. Each person was asked to determine which of three different lines matched the length of the target line. All the
actors responded with the same, incorrect answer, and this was done in order to test the participant’s tendency to
conform in response to the group pressure (1955). The researchers’ study will look at the tendency of an individual to
match their views with a common view of the social group, highlighting the important role of conformity and groupthink
within social groups. In addition to this, these social psychology concepts can provide a lens into how the political
identity is formed. The researchers’ study looks specifically at the correlation between an individual’s political
affiliation and their social group’s political affiliation, trying to identify the role of conformity role from a
political perspective.
The research that creates a foundation for this study discusses the direct impact of the 2016 Presidential Election in
depth. The cases span from the impact of political attitudes toward people of opposing political views to relationships
and how they stand the test of time in regards to tribalistic political minds. To clarify any matters that seem vague,
the relationships examined throughout the study were amongst peers and family members, two groups that were believed to
be primary social groups. This study by Shanto Iyengar and Sean J. Westwood, political scientists of Stanford University
and Princeton University respectively, went on an objective route in applying multiple political scholars’ opinions on
how detrimental the impact of politics can have on friends if they are not shared views (Avenue, 2016). However, this
study does not fray away from the now taboo topic of politics around those in peer groups and family, as it discusses
the long term impacts of politics on a relationship by examining one marriage of two people from differing ends of the
political spectrum. The article mainly serves to convey advice regarding discussion of politics by saying society needs
to encourage conversation while learning to listen and respect opposing viewpoints. In addition to this the article
discusses the political attitudes of those of differing socioeconomic situations such as poverty stricken, wealthy, and
middle class.
A study conducted by Paul A. Beck analyzes the social influence of friends on an election. This study delves into the
topic of groupthink: if people surround themselves with too many people of one ideology, citizens tend to skew toward
one particular ideology (2002). Groupthink can quickly evolve into group polarization. When an individual is surrounded
by a group that shares the same beliefs, not only will their beliefs match with the beliefs of the group, but these
beliefs with become stronger. The study also examines the 1992 Election in depth to discuss third party voters and the
implications of not conforming to an establishment party (Beck, 2002). In particular the study looks at how in a
polarized group, if one person differs from the group they are more likely to suppress that viewpoint, while those who
were more vocal leaned heavily towards a party and had a low openness (Beck, 2002). This reinforces the idea that the
political affiliation of an individual’s friends will likely have a high correlation with the individual’s political
affiliation. In addition to this the article discusses the political attitudes of those of differing socioeconomic
situations such as poverty stricken, wealthy, and middle class.


# Methods Section
The study explored the correlation between political affiliation and friendships. Political affiliation was determined
through a survey involving several questions that asked about the participant’s views regarding specific political
topics (APPENDIX B). These questions were selected from another political affiliation quiz that the researchers found to
be personally reliable, The Political Compass (“The Political Compass,” 2001).
A scale of strongly disagree to strongly agree (1-4) was used in order to follow the format of the Likert scale (Likert,
1932). The use of the Likert scale was especially important since the research was done through a survey. The Likert
scale ensured that the participant was unable to choose a “neutral” score, so the participant must decide to what extent
they agree or disagree with each particular statement in the survey.
The survey was chosen as the method of receiving data since it was the most accessible format for collecting data and
could be completed by anyone through access to the internet and social media, as long as the consent form was completed
by the participant (APPENDIX C). The responses to the consent form were only accessible to the faculty advisor,
Kerri-Anne Alexanderson. This maintained confidentiality, so the researchers only had access to the participants’
responses to the survey itself, creating anonymity.
This survey contained three important concepts that needed to be operationally defined: political affiliation, social
group, and friend. Political affiliation was defined as the party with which an individual’s views most closely aligned.
This was determined through a section of the survey with questions from The Political Compass, as mentioned above
(APPENDIX B). Social group was defined as the participant’s five closest friends, and a friend was defined as someone
who the participant spent a significant amount of time with voluntarily. The researchers ensured that 25 of the 28
questions were partisan in order to elicit a polarizing belief. In addition to that, around five questions per topic
were grouped into specific political issues such as military, fiscal and monetary policy, religion, social beliefs, and
the Constitution. This was chosen to ensure that a diverse range of topics were explored to look at the individual's
overall political identity.
Our data collection process lasted from November 18th to November 30th. The researchers opened the survey to the broader
community by sharing the link through social media such as Facebook, Snapchat, and the Pine Crest School eLearning page.
From there the researchers waited for participants to complete the survey. Once the survey was closed, the researchers
calculated the data utilizing Google Sheets.






# Results
The responses of 53 participants were analyzed and used in the creation of the graphs. The survey received a total of 72
responses, but 19 of these responses were not able to be used due to an incomplete survey.
Data Analysis
If the study were to be repeated, the researchers should create more explicit directions for each section of the survey
in order to avoid receiving responses that are incomplete. Because the researchers’ survey received a smaller sample
size of 53 responses, the results of this study cannot be generalized to a larger population. It is important to
recognize that, although the researchers calculated political affiliation scores for each participant and their social
group, the social group scores were based on the participants’ judgements of their social group, not the members of the
social group themselves. Therefore, the political affiliation scores for the social group may not always be completely
accurate.
Both sections of the survey contained the same questions, but the first section pertained to the participant’s own
beliefs, and the second section pertained to the majority of the participant’s social group beliefs. Some participants
believed the second half of the survey was a duplication of the first half. The researchers did not recognize that this
characteristic would create confusion prior to opening the survey, and this resulted in a slightly smaller sample size
than expected.
Despite the smaller sample size, the data collected resulted in several interesting findings, all contributing to the
initial question of how an individual’s political affiliation correlates to the social group’s political affiliation.
The vast majority of the responses to the survey question asking what the participant believed their own political
affiliation was resulted in Democrats at a margin of 56.6% to 18.9% for Republicans, with the remaining percentage going
towards Independents at 9.4% and other party affiliations at 15.1% (APPENDIX A, Figure 2). Similarly, the survey
question asking what the participant believed the majority of their social group’s political affiliation was resulted in
52.8% for Democrats, 26.4% for Republicans, 15.1% for Independents, and 5.7% for other party affiliation (APPENDIX A,
Figure 1). In both the individual and the social group, the greatest percentage of people are affiliated with the
Democratic Party. This highlights an important similarity in political affiliation between the individual and social
group. However, it is noted that those who responded as Democrat for the individual question did not necessarily respond
as Democrat for the social group as well, so a correlation is not immediately evident based on this data.
Ignoring the Independent and Other responses, the data shows that both the individual and social group have the largest
number of political affiliations with the Democratic Party (APPENDIX A, Figures 3 and 4). Both graphs have the greatest
number of party affiliations being Moderate Democrats, then the order follows with Democrats, Republicans, and Moderate
Republicans. It is interesting to note that the Democratic category was significantly larger than the Republican option
in the both the social group and the individual especially considering Pine Crest’s location within a heavily democratic
region.
The graph that directly addresses the question of the research is represented in Figure 5 (APPENDIX A, Figure 5). This
graph compares the individual’s political affiliation to what the individual believed their social group’s political
affiliation was. The r value of this collection of data is .295, revealing a weak correlation between the individual’s
political affiliation and the social group’s political affiliation. While the data is not conclusive enough to find a
definitive correlation between social groups and friends political affiliations, the conductors of this study believe
that if this study were administered to a broader audience of varying ages and socioeconomic ranges it would establish
the relationship. In addition to this, the data may be skewed due to our population being significantly towards one
political end of the spectrum. Individuals who were calculated to have a strong political affiliation or be close to
that value (49 for Democrats, 76 for Republicans), were found to have social groups that were also in this “strong
political affiliation” category. Many of those who scored as Moderates varied more in their social group’s political
affiliations. This data highlights an important difference between participants with strong political beliefs and
participants with moderate political beliefs. Those with stronger beliefs were more likely to have social groups that
aligned more closely with their own beliefs, while those who had moderate beliefs seemed to have a wider variety of
beliefs in their social group.


# Conclusion
The data acquired from the researchers’ survey supports the hypothesis that an individual’s political affiliation will
positively correlate with their social group’s overall political affiliation. The data show a weak correlation between
the individual and social group political affiliation, with r=.295 (APPENDIX A, Figure 5). While this data supports the
initial hypothesis, the researchers realize the possibility that this was influenced due to the demographics of those
who participated in the study. Survey responses showed a heavy lean toward democratic policies, suggesting that this
idea of limited demographic representation could be a bias in the research.










# Works Cited
Asch, S. (1955, November). Opinions and social pressure. Scientific American, 193, 5. Retrieved January 15, 2018, from
<https://www.lucs.lu.se/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Asch-1955-Opinions-and-Social-Pressure.pdf>

Avenue, N. (2016, February 16). When Your Friends Don't Share Your Politics. Retrieved from
https://www.forbes.com/sites/nextavenue/2016/02/16/when-your-friends-dont-share-your-politics/#758d4dd45c32

Beck, P.A. (2002). Encouraging political defection: the role of personal discussion networks in partisan desertions to
the opposition party and Perot votes in 1992. Political Behavior, 24, 309-337. Retrieved September 23, 2018, from
https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/1558377.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3A38fd62a892dc33c6c932523e8f43b3eb

Campos, C.F.S., Heap, S.H., and Lopez de Leon, F.L. (2017, October 1). The political influence of peer groups:
experimental evidence in the classroom. Oxford Economic Papers, 69, 4, 963-985. Retrieved September 18, 2018, from
https://academic.oup.com/oep/article/69/4/963/2737463

Kenny, C.B. (1994). The microenvironment of attitude change. The Journal of Politics, 56, 715-28. Retrieved September
23, 2018, from https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/2132189.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3Ae54e76f87c0c12eff324f2884b419006

Likert, R. (1932). A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of Psychology, 140, 1–55. Retrieved January
14, 2019, from https://legacy.voteview.com/pdf/Likert_1932.pdf

N.A. (2001). The political compass. Pace News LTD. Retrieved October 20, 2018, from https://www.politicalcompass.org/
Pew Research (2016, August 3). Few Clinton or Trump supporters have close friends in the other camp. Pew Research
Center. Retrieved September 10, 2018, from
http://www.people-press.org/2016/08/03/few-clinton-or-trump-supporters-have-close-friends-in-the-other-camp/

Pew Research (2017, October 5). Partisan animosity, personal politics, view of Trump. Pew Research Center. Retrieved
September 10, 2018, from http://www.people-press.org/2017/10/05/8-partisan-animosity-personal-politics-views-of-trump/

Schmidt, A. (2016, May 26). Groupthink. Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved January 16, 2019, from
https://www.britannica.com/science/groupthink